-----------Software and Frameworks----------
Python 3.9+: Primary programming language used for backend API development and model inference.

FastAPI: Modern, asynchronous web framework powering the backend services and API endpoints.

React.js: Frontend library for building an interactive, responsive user interface.

MongoDB Atlas: Cloud-hosted NoSQL database service used to store detection records, user submissions, and metadata.

Uvicorn: ASGI server used to run FastAPI applications in production.

Data Models and AI Frameworks
YOLOv8 (You Only Look Once v8): Real-time object detection deep learning model trained to identify potholes, fires, garbage, and waterlogging.

Custom-trained weights (best.pt): Model weights trained specifically on urban hazard datasets for high accuracy.

OpenCV: Computer vision library used for image preprocessing and specialized tasks like pothole age estimation based on edge and texture analysis.


-----------Libraries and Dependencies-----------
Backend Python Packages (listed in requirements.txt):

fastapi — Web API framework

uvicorn[standard] — ASGI server for deployment

pymongo — MongoDB client for database operations

torch — PyTorch backend for YOLOv8

opencv-python — Image processing tools

numpy — Numerical operations support

python-multipart — To handle multipart file data uploads

Frontend JavaScript Libraries:

react — UI rendering

reconnecting-websocket — Ensures persistent WebSocket connections for live alerts

CSS/SCSS libraries for styling and responsive 




--------Procedure for Running the Project---------
Set up Environment

Install Python 3.9+ and Node.js.

Clone the project repository.

Install Backend Dependencies

Navigate to the backend folder.

Run pip install -r requirements.txt to install required Python packages.

Configure MongoDB

Create a MongoDB Atlas cluster or local instance.

Add your connection string to the .env file as MONGO_URI.

Start Backend Server

Run the FastAPI app using:

bash
uvicorn app:app --reload
Install Frontend Dependencies

Navigate to the frontend folder.

Run npm install to install React dependencies.

Start Frontend Server

Run the React development server:

bash
npm start
Use the Application

Access the frontend at http://localhost:3000.

Upload images and report hazards.

View live detection notifications on the dashboard.

Monitor Logs and Alerts

Observe backend console for processing logs.

Check live alerts via WebSocket on frontend.